DOCS-2536: Refactor data service pages (#3473)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/services/data/_index.md

no_service: true
---

> The data management service is a robust solution for handling machine data, allowing you to capture data, sync it to the cloud, and query it.

Reviewer: imo language like 'robust' is a bit marketing/salesy for what i'd expect in documentation. also "handling" machine data is confusing - what about:

"The data management service captures, syncs, and enables cloud querying of machine data."

Author: Agreed. Perhaps this is a solution that includes the user:
```suggestion
The data management service allows you to capture data, sync it to the cloud, and query it.
```

Reviewer: i prefer the former that doesn't 'include the user'; it's shorter + I feel like we're losing specific clarity by trying to 'include the user'.  E.g., the data management service doesn't really allow _you_ to "sync it to the cloud"; the user can configure how _the service_ syncs it to the cloud.

Author: I hear ya... This is how we generally tend to do it, to indicate that the service is a tool that the user is actively choosing to use to accomplish things, rather than just the service acting in a vacuum without the user choosing to use it and configuring it accordingly. @npentrel what is your opinion?

Reviewer 2: The data management service has nothing to do with query - the service is what runs on the machine, the querying is a cloud capability. 

How about:
The data management service allows you to reliably capture and sync data to the cloud where you can query data from all your machines.

Author: ```suggestion
The data management service allows you to reliably capture and sync data to the cloud where you can query data from all your machines.
```

> The data management service is a robust solution for smart machine data handling, [data capture, and cloud synchronization](/services/data/capture-sync/).

Reviewer 2: I don't like that the link is only on part of what's offered. I think then it's probably better not to have a link here. 
```suggestion
The data management service is a robust solution for handling machine data, allowing you to capture data, sync it to the cloud, and query it.
```

> Using the data management service, you can collect data from different parts of a robot, IoT device, or any other machine.

Author: Hmm I see your point but I believe the point here was not so much about capturing, but rather to emphasize that data could come from any sort of device. Can shorten for brevity, but I don't want to spend too much time reworking this one sentence, since this PR is more about reorganizing the whole data docs structure, unless you have a better suggestion off hand?
```suggestion
You can collect data from different parts of a robot, IoT device, or any other machine.
```

> Using the data management service, you can collect data from different parts of a robot, IoT device, or any other machine.

Reviewer: i like this "You can.." change, especially in context of our discussion above re the opening sentence not including the user.  Now it's like:

- This is what Data Management is.
- This is how _you_ can use it.

> Using the data management service, you can collect data from different parts of a robot, IoT device, or any other machine.

Author: Okay I'll apply this and delete the following sentence!

> Once collected, you can configure which data to securely sync to the cloud, and view, sort, or manage it directly in the cloud without needing to manually gather data from each machine.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once collected, you can configure which data to securely sync to the cloud, and view, query, or manage it directly in the cloud without needing to manually gather data from each machine.
```

> Once collected, you can securely sync data to the cloud, and view, query, or manage it directly in the cloud without needing to manually gather data from each machine.

Reviewer: also duplicative of original sentence; not clear to me what this is adding

> Once collected, you can securely sync data to the cloud, and view, query, or manage it directly in the cloud without needing to manually gather data from each machine.

Author: It's supposed to emphasize the single pane of glass value. But you're right there's some redundancy; my suggestion above attempts to shorten while still pointing out why someone might want to use it--lmk what you think.
```suggestion
```

> Once collected, you can configure which data to securely sync to the cloud, and view, query, or manage it directly in the cloud without needing to manually gather data from each machine.

Author: ```suggestion
Once collected, you can securely sync data to the cloud, and view, query, or manage it directly in the cloud without needing to manually gather data from each machine.
```
I'm going to say "securely" instead of "selectively" because I think "selectively" could be interpreted in some odd ways

## On-device data management

The data management service:

- Automatically resumes capturing data after your machine restarts.
- Securely transfers data to the cloud at the frequency you define.
- Automatically deletes local data after syncing for space management.

{{< cards >}}
{{% manualcard link="/services/data/capture-sync/" %}}

### Data capture and cloud sync

More details and how to configure capture and sync.

{{% /manualcard %}}
{{< /cards >}}

> You can configure the frequency of data capture individually for each supported component:

Reviewer 2: you can also do this for the vision service. I think let's either move these cards into https://docs-test.viam.dev/3473/services/data/capture-sync/#supported-components-and-services or just rely on that to display what's supported.

Author: I thought this was a good way to make things more visual and concrete. Can we assume they'll go to the other page?

Reviewer 2: Ok. Then we'd need to add vision service here too and make it more general. Or is there a reason you think we should point out components but not services?
I do think we may want to move away from placing focus on the configuration and focus more on the capturing aspect -> "You can capture data from most components and services." They'll dig into the rest if they want to use it

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can capture data from most components and services:
```

Author: ```suggestion
You can capture data from any of the following components and services:
```

{{< cards >}}
{{< relatedcard link="/components/arm/">}}
{{< relatedcard link="/components/board/">}}
{{< relatedcard link="/components/camera/">}}
{{< relatedcard link="/components/encoder/">}}
{{< relatedcard link="/components/gantry/">}}
{{< relatedcard link="/components/motor/">}}
{{< relatedcard link="/components/movement-sensor/">}}
{{< relatedcard link="/components/sensor/">}}
{{< relatedcard link="/components/servo/">}}
{{< /cards >}}

## Cloud data management

<br>
{{<imgproc src="/architecture/data-flow.svg" resize="x1100" declaredimensions=true alt="Data flowing from local disk to cloud to the Viam app, SDKs, and MQL and SQL queries." >}}
<br><br>

Experience streamlined data handling with advanced querying, viewing, and filtering capabilities, along with efficient data labeling and exporting tools.

<!-- markdownlint-disable-file MD034 -->

{{< cards >}}

> {{% manualcard link="https://app.viam.com/data/view" %}}

Reviewer 2: I don't love that this links to the app when everything else has docs associated with it.  Maybe the first thing shouldn't be a cards but should be mentioned before we list the cards?

## On-device data management

The data management service:

> - Automatically resumes capturing data after your machine restarts.

Author: ```suggestion
- Automatically captures data at the rate you specify.
   If your machine restarts, data capture resumes automatically.
```

- Securely transfers data to the cloud at the frequency you define.
- Automatically deletes local data after syncing for space management.

{{< cards >}}
{{% manualcard link="/services/data/capture-sync/" %}}

### Data capture and cloud sync

More details and how to configure capture and sync.

{{% /manualcard %}}
{{< /cards >}}

You can configure the frequency of data capture individually for each supported component:

{{< cards >}}
{{< relatedcard link="/components/arm/">}}
{{< relatedcard link="/components/board/">}}
{{< relatedcard link="/components/camera/">}}
{{< relatedcard link="/components/encoder/">}}
{{< relatedcard link="/components/gantry/">}}
{{< relatedcard link="/components/motor/">}}
{{< relatedcard link="/components/movement-sensor/">}}
{{< relatedcard link="/components/sensor/">}}

> {{< relatedcard link="/components/servo/">}}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{{< relatedcard link="/components/servo/">}}
{{< relatedcard link="/servicses/vision/">}}
```

## On-device data management

The data management service:

- Automatically captures data at the rate you specify.

>   If your machine restarts, data capture resumes automatically.

Author: ```suggestion
  If your machine running `viam-server` restarts, data capture resumes automatically.
  (For ESP32 microcontrollers running `viam-micro-server`, unsynced data is lost on restart.)
```

Reviewer 2: That's a bit too detailed at this point. If someone cares about losing data when connection is lost and a device restarts I think they will read more into it

Reviewer: agree naomi too in the weeds for this overview of the service

what do yall think about these potential options (solving for Jessamy's concern that we currently don't surface this info anywhere):
i) don't say anything explicit here and explicitly say in the viam-micro-server documentation that unlike viam-server, data capture does not automatically restart.
ii) if you feel it does need to be explicitly said, make a docs pg for behavior on machine restart (as naomi says - if someone cares about losing data when connection is lost and a device restarts, then that pg would be a natural place to look)

Author: Oh wait I'm wrong, we do explicitly state this difference on the `capture-sync.md` page in the tabs for viam-server vs viam-micro-server. So I guess I should just remove this part that only applies to viam-server:
```suggestion
```

> - Securely transfers data to the cloud at the frequency you define.

Reviewer: I'd use "sync" or "upload' rather than 'transfer' for sake of consistency w other places we talk about it in docs

Author: Good call
```suggestion
- Securely syncs data to the cloud at the frequency you define.
```

- Automatically deletes local data after syncing for space management.

{{< cards >}}
{{% manualcard link="/services/data/capture-sync/" %}}

### Data capture and cloud sync

More details and how to configure capture and sync.

{{% /manualcard %}}
{{< /cards >}}

You can capture data from any of the following components and services:

{{< cards >}}
{{< relatedcard link="/components/arm/">}}
{{< relatedcard link="/components/board/">}}
{{< relatedcard link="/components/camera/">}}
{{< relatedcard link="/components/encoder/">}}
{{< relatedcard link="/components/gantry/">}}
{{< relatedcard link="/components/motor/">}}
{{< relatedcard link="/components/movement-sensor/">}}
{{< relatedcard link="/components/sensor/">}}
{{< relatedcard link="/components/servo/">}}
{{< relatedcard link="/servicses/vision/">}}
{{< /cards >}}

## Cloud data management

<br>
{{<imgproc src="/architecture/data-flow.svg" resize="x1100" declaredimensions=true alt="Data flowing from local disk to cloud to the Viam app, SDKs, and MQL and SQL queries." class="imgzoom">}}
<br><br>

> Once your data is synced to the cloud, you can view, filter, label, and assign it to datasets from your [Viam app **DATA** page](https://app.viam.com/data/view).

Reviewer: Original sentence:
“Once your data is synced to the cloud, you can view, filter, label, and assign it to datasets from your Viam app DATA page.”

Clarified version:
“Once your data is synced to the cloud, you can view, filter, and label it, and assign data to datasets from your Viam app DATA page.”

Reason for the change:
The original version was ambiguous because the phrase “assign it to datasets” could be interpreted as performing multiple actions (view, filter, label) directly “to datasets,” which isn’t the intention.

Author: ```suggestion
Once your data is synced to the cloud, you can view, filter, and label data, and assign data to datasets, from your [Viam app **DATA** page](https://app.viam.com/data/view).
```

### Upload a batch of data

> Upload data to the Viam app from your computer or mobile device using the data client API, Viam CLI, or Viam mobile app.

Reviewer: two comments here:

1) subtle distinction that the user is not uploading data to the Viam app, they're uploading it to the Viam Cloud which the app pulls from like any other client would. 

2) Although it's true one can capture data directly from the mobile app right now, this is a bit of an edge case and I'm not certain we want to be pushing users to do it from our docs. (Not saying we don't, but wanted to check if you all have an explicit reason _to_ mention it here. If not, my 2 cents is that we remove for now until there is a specific reason to include it).

Reviewer: on (1)

this is the language we use in static/include/services/apis/generated/data_manager-table.md which is more appropriate:

"
| [`Sync`](/services/data/capture-sync/#sync) | **Sync data stored on the machine to the cloud.** | <p class="center-text"><i class="fas fa-times" title="no"></i></p> |"

Reviewer: ^ same comment as above; technically saying "Upload data to the Viam app" isn't incorrect if you interpret "Viam app" to mean the monorepo, but for sake of clarity for end user i recommend we adopt the language used in my above comment "Upload data to the Viam cloud.."

Author: ```suggestion
Upload data to the Viam cloud from your computer or mobile device using the data client API, the Viam CLI, or the Viam mobile app.
```
Okay I'll change it to the Viam cloud. However, the reason the Viam mobile app is here is that this is talking about uploading a batch of data, NOT capturing data.

{{% /manualcard %}}
{{< /cards >}}

### Query your data

Once your data has [synced](/services/data/capture-sync/), you can query it in multiple ways, including through the [data client API](/appendix/apis/data-client/) or [inside the Viam app](/how-tos/sensor-data-query-with-third-party-tools/).

> For _tabular_ sensor data, you can also [run {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="sql" text="SQL" >}} or {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="mql" text="MQL" >}} queries](/how-tos/sensor-data-query-sdk/) against your synced data from the [Query subtab](https://app.viam.com/data/query) of the **Data** tab in the Viam app.

Reviewer: **suggested edit:**

Once your data has [synced](https://github.com/services/data/capture-sync/), you can query it in several ways, including through the [data client API](https://github.com/appendix/apis/data-client/) or directly in the [Viam app](https://github.com/how-tos/sensor-data-query-with-third-party-tools/). For tabular sensor data, you can run [{{< glossary_tooltip term_id=“sql” text=“SQL” >}} or {{< glossary_tooltip term_id=“mql” text=“MQL” >}} queries](https://github.com/how-tos/sensor-data-query-sdk/) either from the [Query subtab](https://app.viam.com/data/query) under the Data tab in the Viam app, or through our SDKs.

**Explanation of Changes:**

1.	Removed "also":
I removed “also” to avoid the implication that a new, separate querying method was being introduced. Instead, I clarified that this is an expansion of how you can query data inside the Viam app and SDKs.
2.	Clarified query methods:
I added “either” to explicitly clarify that MQL/SQL queries are possible both within the Viam app and through SDKs, avoiding the implication that these queries are exclusive to the app. This ensures users understand that they have multiple options for running SQL/MQL queries, whether using the app or SDKs.

Author: I just brought this language over from the other page but, I'm thinking it's written like this because the query subtab is only for tabular data?

Reviewer: not sure i'm following can you help me understand? I'm not suggesting that we imply one can query binary data. I'm saying that the version as-is says this:
First sentence: "Once your data has synced you can query it in multiple ways, incl through the api or inside the Viam App"
Second sentence: "For tabular you can ALSO run queries from the query subtab"

my point is that isn't the idea intro'd in the second sentence "you can run queries inside the query subtab" covered by the first sentence saying "you can query your data once it has synced incl through inside the Viam App"?

so it's confusing IMO to say "also". 

Does that make sense? No implication that you can query binary data.

Author: Right--what do you think of my suggestion below? I think that encompasses what you are saying because it removes the redundant mention of querying from in the app, and only talks about querying in the app for tabular data.

> Once your data has [synced](/services/data/capture-sync/), you can query it in multiple ways, including through the [data client API](/appendix/apis/data-client/) or [inside the Viam app](/how-tos/sensor-data-query-with-third-party-tools/).
> For _tabular_ sensor data, you can also [run {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="sql" text="SQL" >}} or {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="mql" text="MQL" >}} queries](/how-tos/sensor-data-query-sdk/) against your synced data from the [Query subtab](https://app.viam.com/data/query) of the **Data** tab in the Viam app.

Author: ```suggestion
Once your data has [synced](/services/data/capture-sync/), you can query it using the [data client API](/appendix/apis/data-client/).
For _tabular_ sensor data, you can also [run {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="sql" text="SQL" >}} or {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="mql" text="MQL" >}} queries](/how-tos/sensor-data-query-sdk/) from the [Query subtab](https://app.viam.com/data/query) of the **Data** tab in the Viam app.
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once your data has [synced](https://github.com/services/data/capture-sync/), you can query it in several ways, including through the [data client API](https://github.com/appendix/apis/data-client/) or directly in the [Viam app](https://github.com/how-tos/sensor-data-query-with-third-party-tools/). For tabular sensor data, you can run [{{< glossary_tooltip term_id="sql" text="SQL" >}} or {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="mql" text="MQL" >}} queries](https://github.com/how-tos/sensor-data-query-sdk/) either from the [Query subtab](https://app.viam.com/data/query) under the **Data** tab in the Viam app, or through our SDKs.
```

{{< cards >}}
{{% card link="/how-tos/sensor-data-query-with-third-party-tools/" %}}
{{% card link="/how-tos/sensor-data-query-sdk/" %}}
{{% card link="/appendix/apis/data-client/" %}}
{{< /cards >}}

### Permissions

Data management permissions vary between owners and operators.
For more information about who can do what with data, see [Data Permissions](/cloud/rbac/#data-and-machine-learning).

## API

The [data client API](/appendix/apis/data-client/) supports the following methods:

<br>

> Methods to upload data like images or sensor readings directly to the Viam app:

Reviewer: flagging: not uploading data to the Viam App as defined as www.app.viam.com ; we shouldn't suggest this

Author: Better?
```suggestion
Methods to upload data like images or sensor readings directly to the Viam cloud:
```

> {{% /manualcard %}}

Author: good point

{{< /cards >}}

### Query your data

Once you have [synced](/services/data/capture-sync/), you can query the data you've collected in multiple ways, including through the [data client API](/appendix/apis/data-client/) or [inside the Viam app](/how-tos/sensor-data-query-with-third-party-tools/).
For _tabular_ sensor data, you can [run {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="sql" text="SQL" >}} or {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="mql" text="MQL" >}} queries](/how-tos/sensor-data-query-sdk/) against your synced data from the [Query subtab](https://app.viam.com/data/query) of the **Data** tab in the Viam app.

{{< cards >}}
{{% card link="/how-tos/sensor-data-query-with-third-party-tools/" %}}
{{% card link="/how-tos/sensor-data-query-sdk/" %}}
{{% card link="/appendix/apis/data-client/" %}}
{{< /cards >}}

### Permissions

Data management permissions vary between owners and operators.
For more information about who can do what with data, see [Data Permissions](/cloud/rbac/#data-and-machine-learning).

## API

The [data client API](/appendix/apis/data-client/) supports the following methods:

> {{< expand "Methods to upload data like images or sensor readings directly to the Viam app" >}}

Author: Okay. Yeah I meant to ask about the table styling and how to fix that bug. I did this because it's hard to scan so many methods. I'll add more whitespace between the sections.

{{% /manualcard %}}
{{< /cards >}}

### Query your data

Once you have [synced](/services/data/capture-sync/), you can query the data you've collected in multiple ways, including through the [data client API](/appendix/apis/data-client/) or [inside the Viam app](/how-tos/sensor-data-query-with-third-party-tools/).
For _tabular_ sensor data, you can [run {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="sql" text="SQL" >}} or {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="mql" text="MQL" >}} queries](/how-tos/sensor-data-query-sdk/) against your synced data from the [Query subtab](https://app.viam.com/data/query) of the **Data** tab in the Viam app.

{{< cards >}}
{{% card link="/how-tos/sensor-data-query-with-third-party-tools/" %}}

> {{% card link="/how-tos/sensor-data-query-sdk/" %}}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{{% card link="/how-tos/sensor-data-query-sdk/" %}}
{{% card link="/appendix/apis/data-client/" %}}
```

{{< /cards >}}

### Permissions

Data management permissions vary between owners and operators.

> For more information about who can do what with data, see [Data Permissions](/cloud/rbac/#data-and-machine-learning).

Reviewer 2: The API that you have on this page should be on the Data Capture and Sync page because it is the API of the data management service. On this page we probably want to instead have the API tables from https://docs-test.viam.dev/3473/appendix/apis/data-client/#api. And we may also want to link to https://docs-test.viam.dev/3473/cli/#data
